BANKSY notebook text: PR 1/2 (#1000)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: spatial/02-spatial_clustering.Rmd

Reviewer: I think you may want to specifically comment the `oob_squish` line, as it isn't immediately clear that you need to set both `limits` and `oob` for the desired behavior. Or what `oob` means. [Certain people might get confused.](https://tardis.fandom.com/wiki/Ood)

Author: > [Certain people might get confused.](https://tardis.fandom.com/wiki/Ood)

👏

## Objectives

- Perform dimensionality reduction (PCA and UMAP) and graph-based clustering on Visium data
- Use BANKSY to perform spatially-aware dimensionality reduction and clustering
- Compare clusters calculated with and without spatial information

## Introduction

In this notebook, we'll cluster expression data from a mouse sample with osteosarcoma lung metastases from [Reinecke et al. (2025)](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-24-0049).
This sample was processed using second-generation Visium technology and quantified with `Space Ranger 2.1.1`.

> We have already processed this dataset for you, including filtering out low quality spots (note that `SpotSweeper` removed 20 low-quality spots during this step) and normalization, which you can see in this notebook: <https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/blob/master/spatial/setup/osteo/prepare-osteo-data.Rmd>.

Reviewer: Do they need to note it?
```suggestion
We have already processed this dataset for you, including filtering out low quality spots (`SpotSweeper` removed 20 low-quality spots) and normalization, which you can see in this notebook: <https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/blob/master/spatial/setup/osteo/prepare-osteo-data.Rmd>.
```

As we have discussed, Visium spatial transcriptomics data does not quantify expression at the single-cell level, but rather each Visium spot captures the combined expression of 5-20 cells.
This means that when we perform clustering on Visium data, we are actually clustering spots with similar transcriptional profiles, not individual cells.

Also unlike single-cell data, we now have an additional consideration of spatial information.

> We can choose to incorporate each spot's physical position in the tissue alongside its expression profile during clustering, which may help to approximate spatial domains. 

Reviewer: I think it might be worth explicitly spelling out the motivation a bit here: we assume that nearby spots will be more similar than separated spots (though we can make this more general in some ways).

normalized_rds <- file.path(data_dir, "osteo_normalized_spe.rds")
```

We'll also define the path for outputting clusters.

> To save space, we'll conclude by export a TSV with the clusters we calculate in this notebook.

Reviewer: For accuracy, I wanted to add something about other metadata. I don't think that requires renaming anything, but up to you. 
```suggestion
To save space, we'll conclude by exporting a TSV with the clusters we calculate in this notebook (along with other per-spot metadata).
```

```{r}
cluster_tsv <- file.path(data_dir, "osteo_clusters.tsv")
```

## Import

Let's start by reading in the pre-processed SPE object:

```{r import-rds, live = TRUE}
spe <- readr::read_rds(normalized_rds)
```

Before working with this SPE, let's get familiar with it. 
We'll first print the SPE to review its contents, including the number of spots and genes and what assays are available.

```{r print-spe, live = TRUE}
# print the spe
spe
```

We'll also create a plot of the H&E image to orient ourselves to the tissue before diving into clustering, adjusting the styling of the plot to our preferences.
We'll refer back to it throughout the notebook to help interpret the spatial patterns we find.

```{r plot-visium}
#| fig.width: 3

# define H&E plot for general use in notebook
he_plot <- plotVisium(spe, spots = FALSE, zoom = TRUE) +
  # add styling to match other panels
  theme(
    plot.title = ggplot2::element_text(
      hjust = 0.5,
      margin = ggplot2::margin(0, 0, 0.1, 0)
    ),
    panel.border = ggplot2::element_rect(color = "black", linewidth = 0.3)
  )

he_plot
```

> This image clearly shows regions of tumor cells amid the lung parenchyma, which itself is more sparse because of the lung's alveolar spaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This image clearly shows regions of tumor cells amid the lung parenchyma, which appears less dense because of the lung's alveolar spaces.
```

## Import

Let's start by reading in the pre-processed SPE object:

```{r import-rds, live = TRUE}
spe <- readr::read_rds(normalized_rds)
```

Before working with this SPE, let's get familiar with it. 
We'll first print the SPE to review its contents, including the number of spots and genes and what assays are available.

```{r print-spe, live = TRUE}
# print the spe
spe
```

> We'll also visualize the H&E image to orient ourselves to the tissue before diving into clustering, using some custom styling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll also create a plot of the H&E image to orient ourselves to the tissue before diving into clustering, adjusting the styling of the plot to our preferences.
```

he_plot
```

This image clearly shows regions of tumor cells amid the lung parenchyma, which itself is more sparse because of the lung's alveolar spaces.

Let's also get a sense of the RNA counts here by plotting some of the QC statistics that were calculated for you, including the total UMIs (`sum`) and number of unique detected genes (`detected`).

> Note that these plots use right-censoring and set an upper limit on the color scale to be able to see lower value spots more clearly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that these plots use set an upper limit on the color scale to be able to see lower value spots more clearly.
```

total_plot + detected_plot
```

> There is clearly more RNA expression in the tumor regions than in the parenchyma, which makes sense biologically: tumor cells are highly proliferative and transcriptionally active, but parenchymal is comparatively sparse.

Reviewer: Adding a bit of clarity about what "sparse" means here.
```suggestion
There is clearly more RNA expression in the tumor regions than in the parenchyma, which makes sense biologically: tumor cells are highly proliferative and transcriptionally active, while the lower density of parenchymal tissue makes for fewer cells per spot, and less overall expression.
```

This plot also illustrates why local QC filtering thresholds are preferable to global ones for heterogeneous tissue samples like this.
Specifically, the parenchymal spots have lower UMI and gene counts not because they are low quality, but because of the alveolar architecture of lung tissue itself.
A global threshold would not distinguish between a genuinely low-quality spot and a spot that overlies sparse tissue, and would have ended up preferentially removing parenchymal spots.
For a Visium experiment, we want to retain much of the spatial context, including the contrast between tumor and parenchymal regions, and using local QC thresholds allows us to do so. 

> ## Calculate clusters

Reviewer: I feel like this header may be a bit too high-level, as the whole notebook is about clustering? I might just take it out and promote the lower level headers?
```suggestion
## Dimension reduction and clustering
```

The first clustering analysis we'll perform will look analogous to single-cell post-processing. 
After that, we'll compare to clustering with the `BANKSY` approach to see how including spatial information influences cluster detection.

> ### Expression-based clustering

Reviewer: I think you want the "only" word in here, though the final title might vary; I can't decide if we need to mention DR specifically in headers or not.
```suggestion
### Expression-only analysis
```

In this section, we'll apply the same dimensionality reduction and clustering workflow we would use for single-cell data, treating each spot's expression profile as the unit of analysis without any spatial information.
This serves as a useful baseline for comparison when we later apply the spatially-aware `BANKSY` approach.

> Again, remember that even though we are using single-cell methods, we are still working at the spot level.

Reviewer: These methods are general, not specific to single-cell. 
```suggestion
Again, remember that we are still working at the spot level.
```

> This means clusters will represent regions of similar transcriptional composition, rather than similar cells specifically.

Reviewer: We don't know that transcriptional composition within a spot is similar!
```suggestion
This means clusters will represent groups of cells, rather than similar cells specifically.
```

> We'll start by modeling per-gene expression variance with `scran::modelGeneVar()` and then selecting the top 2000 highly variable genes (HVGs) with `scran::getTopHVGs()` to use for PCA.

Reviewer: Science question: Does this modeling make a big difference here? If we are going to use it, I think we want to make a passing comment about what it is doing, with a link for more info. IA related question is whether the spatial algorithms include similar modeling. If they do not, we might not want to use it here, lest we create non-comparable comparisons.

We should point out that `scran::modelGeneVar()` treats each spot independently and is only considering gene expression (not location) when identifying variable genes.
There is a related concept called _spatially variable genes_ (SVGs), which are genes whose expression varies across the tissue, but we won't be using those in this notebook.

We'll then calculate the PCA with `scater::runPCA()`.

```{r nonspatial pca, live = TRUE}
# model gene variance
gene_variance <- scran::modelGeneVar(spe)

# calculate the top 2000 HVGs
hvg_vector <- scran::getTopHVGs(spe, n = 2000)

# calculate PCE using the top HVGs, saving back to the SPE object
spe <- scater::runPCA(spe, subset_row = hvg_vector)
```

We can now perform graph-based clustering using `scran::clusterCells()`, which calculates clusters using the `bluster` package under the hood.

> We'll use `k = 20` nearest neighbors and the Louvain algorithm.

Reviewer: Note this will require updates if you take my jaccard suggestion

We'll also save these clustering parameters as `cluster_params` so we can reuse the same settings when running spatially-aware `BANKSY` clustering later.

But first, one caveat: it's worth noting that the choice of `k` and clustering algorithm are important analytical decisions (as well as other parameters like resolution, which we are leaving at its default value of 1 here), but we are not going to evaluate those parameters here for time.
In your own research, we do recommend taking some time to explore parameter space when clustering, which you can learn more about in the [the `scRNA-seq-advanced` training module's clustering evaluation exercise](../scRNA-seq-advanced/exercise_05-cluster_evaluation.Rmd).

```{r nonspatial cluster, live = TRUE}
# define clustering parameters
cluster_params <- bluster::NNGraphParam(
  k = 20,

>   cluster.fun = "louvain"

Reviewer: The Louvain algorithm is usually paired with "jaccard" distance measure. Is there a reason you did not do that here? 
```suggestion
 k = 20,
 cluster.fun = "louvain",
 type = "jaccard"
```

Author: Nope, just forgot it wasn't default(!)

)

# perform clustering and save to SPE colData
colData(spe)$cluster_nonspatial <- scran::clusterCells(
  spe,
  use.dimred = "PCA",
  BLUSPARAM = cluster_params
)
```

We'll also calculate a UMAP for visualization using `scater::runUMAP()`.

```{r nonspatial umap}
spe <- scater::runUMAP(spe)
```

Let's visualize our results so far by plotting the UMAP colored by cluster alongside the spatial coordinates plot and H&E image.

> We'll also use a consistent color palette across both panels to make it easier to match each cluster to its location in the tissue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's visualize our results so far by plotting the UMAP and spatial coordinate plots, each colored by cluster with the same color palette.
We'll also include the H&E image for reference.
```

```{r plot nonspatial}
#| message: false
#| fig.width: 10

# define UMAP plot
umap_nonspatial <- scater::plotUMAP(
  spe,
  color_by = "cluster_nonspatial",
  point_size = 0.5
) +

> scale_color_brewer(name = "Non-spatial cluster", palette = "Dark2")

Reviewer: One thing I noted after you sent me back to my own petard: the legend for the umap has alpha, while the coordinate plot does not, which makes the colors look a bit different. Can you use `guides(alpha = "none")` here to make them consistent?

# define coordinates plot
coords_nonspatial <- plotCoords(
  spe,
  annotate = "cluster_nonspatial",
  point_size = 1.25
) +
  scale_color_brewer(name = "Non-spatial cluster", palette = "Dark2")

# combine plots with patchwork

> umap_nonspatial + coords_nonspatial + he_plot

Reviewer: I don't know, is this any better? Probably makes the umap too big.
```suggestion
umap_nonspatial / (coords_nonspatial + he_plot)
```

Author: I had success booting the whitespace by setting fig.height!

```

We see four clusters with some correspondence to the tissue structure visible in the H&E: the clusters appear to capture a gradient from the most tumor-dense spots to the sparser parenchymal regions.

> Interestingly, spots that are spatially adjacent also tend to sit near each other in the UMAP, even though no spatial information was provided (and we want to be careful not to "over-interpret" the UMAP too!).

Reviewer: Can you really tell this? Without actually labeling the individual points, I feel like saying this is going farther than you should, even with the caveat.

Reviewer: My second thought is that you should turn this whole paragraph into questions. I don't think we need to make any interpretive statements here.

I would also specifically ask at the end what people think about how adding the spatial info might change the results.

Author: > Can you really tell this? Without actually labeling the individual points, I feel like saying this is going farther than you should, even with the caveat.

This comment brought to you by this comment! ;) https://docs.google.com/document/d/14FelVTKTGouPqDJmb3BRFakyH_lPhMeUvBBJV9Ju-dg/edit?disco=AAAB6o2jMiY

I'm very happy to pivot to questions here though.

This method rests on the assumption that spots in the same tissue domain tend not only to share similar expression profiles, but tend also to be surrounded by spots with similar expression.
In other words, nearby spots are likely to be transcriptionally similar. 
`BANKSY` leverages this insight by incorporating neighborhood information into the PCA itself.
Performing clustering on this spatially-aware PCA allows `BANKSY` to identify clusters with both distinct expression and tissue domain structure.

The `BANKSY` algorithm works in three steps:

1. **Compute the BANKSY matrix** with `Banksy::computeBanksy()`.
For each spot, `BANKSY` averages expression across its `k_geom` nearest spatial neighbors to create a neighborhood expression profile, stored as the `H0` assay. 
Optionally, `BANKSY` can also compute an Azimuthal Gabor Filter (AGF), which captures directional expression gradients that can help resolve finer structure at domain boundaries. 
When AGF is turned on, a second `BANKSY` matrix is stored as the `H1` assay (the `0` and `1` in these assay names indicate if AGF is off or on, respectively). 

2. **Run BANKSY PCA** with `Banksy::runBanksyPCA()`.

> `BANKSY` combines the spot-level normalized expression in `logcounts` and the `BANKSY` neighborhood matrix (`H0` or `H0` and `H1` if AGF is on) into a single weighted matrix that contains both expression and spatial information to calculate PCA on. 

Reviewer: ~~What do you mean by a weighted matrix? That could mean a lot of different things!~~ I should have kept reading. But let's see if I can rephrase it to make it a bit more clear.
```suggestion
`BANKSY` first creates single matrix that is a weighted combination of the normalized expression in `logcounts` and the `BANKSY` neighborhood matrix (`H0` or `H0` and `H1` if AGF is on). 
```

(Note that `BANKSY` will consider all genes present in the SPE when calculating the PCA; it does not subset to only the most variable genes.

> We could perform this ourselves by subsetting the SPE before running `BANKSY`, but for this notebook we will proceed with the full object.)

Reviewer: For comparison between methods, I don't really like this. If we are not going to subset here, then we should include all genes for the previous analysis. Or we should subset here.

Author: Took almost no effort to convince me this is a bad idea. Let me poke around a moment.

Author: FYI #1004

To combine these matrices, `BANKSY` introduces the `lambda` parameter.
`lambda` ranges from 0 -- 1 and controls how much weight is given to the `BANKSY` matrix neighborhood information relative to `logcounts` expression, where a value of 0 considers only `logcounts` expression. 

> The `BANKSY` authors recommend a value of `lambda = 0.2` for Visium spot data, as described in [this `BANKSY` vignettes on parameter selection](https://prabhakarlab.github.io/Banksy/articles/parameter-selection.html#parameters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `BANKSY` authors recommend a value of `lambda = 0.2` for Visium spot data, as described in [this `BANKSY` vignette on parameter selection](https://prabhakarlab.github.io/Banksy/articles/parameter-selection.html#parameters).

`BANKSY` then performs PCA using this combined matrix as the input.
```

Specifically, the parenchymal spots have lower UMI and gene counts not because they are low quality, but because of the alveolar architecture of lung tissue itself.
A global threshold would not distinguish between a genuinely low-quality spot and a spot that overlies sparse tissue, and would have ended up preferentially removing parenchymal spots.
For a Visium experiment, we want to retain much of the spatial context, including the contrast between tumor and parenchymal regions, and using local QC thresholds allows us to do so. 

## Dimension reduction and clustering

The first clustering analysis we'll perform will look analogous to single-cell post-processing. 
After that, we'll compare to clustering with the `BANKSY` approach to see how including spatial information influences cluster detection.

### Expression-only analysis

In this section, we'll apply the same dimensionality reduction and clustering workflow we would use for single-cell data, treating each spot's expression profile as the unit of analysis without any spatial information.
This serves as a useful baseline for comparison when we later apply the spatially-aware `BANKSY` approach.

> Again, remember that we are still working at the spot level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again, remember that we are working at the spot level.
```

We'll then use these modeling results to select the top 2000 genes with the highest biological variation (these are our high-variance genes, aka HVGs), and finally we'll perform PCA that considers just these genes with `scater::runPCA()`.

```{r nonspatial pca, live = TRUE}
# model gene variance
gene_variance <- scran::modelGeneVar(spe)

# calculate the top 2000 HVGs
hvg_vector <- scran::getTopHVGs(spe, n = 2000)

# calculate PCE using the top HVGs, saving back to the SPE object
spe <- scater::runPCA(spe, subset_row = hvg_vector)
```

We can now perform graph-based clustering using `scran::clusterCells()`, which calculates clusters using the `bluster` package under the hood.

We'll use Jaccard weighting and the Louvain algorithm, specifying `k = 20` nearest neighbors.
We'll also save these clustering parameters as `cluster_params` so we can reuse the same settings when running spatially-aware `BANKSY` clustering later.

> But first, one caveat: it's worth noting that the choice of `k` and clustering algorithm are important analytical decisions (as well as other parameters like resolution, which we are leaving at its default value of 1 here), but we are not going to evaluate those parameters here for time.

Reviewer: The "for time" at the end made the sentence a bit hard to parse for me. I would either add a separate sentence or just cut that part off (as I did here)
```suggestion
But first, one caveat: it's worth noting that the choice of `k` and clustering algorithm are important analytical decisions (as well as other parameters like `resolution`, which we are leaving at its default value of 1 here).
```

```{r nonspatial cluster, live = TRUE}
# define clustering parameters
cluster_params <- bluster::NNGraphParam(
 k = 20,
 cluster.fun = "louvain",
 type = "jaccard"
)

# perform clustering and save to SPE colData
colData(spe)$cluster_nonspatial <- scran::clusterCells(
  spe,
  use.dimred = "PCA",
  BLUSPARAM = cluster_params
)
```

We'll also calculate a UMAP for visualization using `scater::runUMAP()`.

```{r nonspatial umap}
spe <- scater::runUMAP(spe)
```

Let's visualize our results so far by plotting the UMAP and spatial coordinate plots, each colored by cluster with the same color palette.
We'll also include the H&E image for reference.

```{r plot nonspatial}
#| message: false
#| fig.width: 10
#| fig.height: 3

# define UMAP plot
umap_nonspatial <- scater::plotUMAP(
  spe,
  color_by = "cluster_nonspatial",
  point_size = 0.5
) +
  # set custom palette and legend title
  scale_color_brewer(
    name = "Non-spatial cluster", 
    palette = "Dark2"
  ) +
  # ensure more visible points in legend
  guides(

>     color = guide_legend(override.aes = list(alpha = 1, size = 1.5))

Reviewer: 👍🏼

To combine these matrices, `BANKSY` introduces the `lambda` parameter.
`lambda` ranges from 0 -- 1 and controls how much weight is given to the `BANKSY` matrix neighborhood information relative to `logcounts` expression, where a value of 0 considers only `logcounts` expression. 
The `BANKSY` authors recommend a value of `lambda = 0.2` for Visium spot data, as described in [this `BANKSY` vignette on parameter selection](https://prabhakarlab.github.io/Banksy/articles/parameter-selection.html#parameters).

`BANKSY` then performs PCA using this combined matrix as the input.

3. **Perform graph-based clustering**.
Once the PCA is calculated, it can be used for a variety of downstream tasks, including clustering and UMAP calculation.
In this notebook, we'll use `scran` and `scater` tools for these steps, but we will also point out that `BANKSY` includes wrapper functions for these calculations, which can be useful if you are evaluating multiple `BANKSY` parameters at once. 

In this notebook, we'll run `BANKSY` in two configurations — without AGF and with AGF — and compare the results.

But, before we get started, we have to modify our SPE object.

> As `BANKSY` does not perform feature selection on its own, we'll perform that ourselves to ensure a fair comparison between clustering approaches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we get started, we have to modify our SPE object.
`BANKSY` does not perform feature selection on its own, but we can use the HVGs that we identified before to ensure a fair comparison between clustering approaches.
```

We'll do this by subsetting the SPE to just the high-variance genes before running `BANKSY` and save it to a new variable `hvg_spe`.
We'll use this SPE object for the rest of the notebook.

```{r subset spe, live = TRUE}
# subset the SPE to contain only HVGs
hvg_spe <- spe[hvg_vector,]
```

#### Without AGF

We'll start by computing the BANKSY matrix without AGF.
As noted above, `lambda = 0.2` is a commonly used starting point for Visium spot data; this value means roughly 80% of the signal in the combined matrix comes from each spot's own expression and 20% comes from its neighborhood.
We'll use `k_geom = 18` spatial neighbors for the neighborhood averaging, which is also the recommended starting point for Visium spot data. 
 

```{r banksy matrix agf off, live = TRUE}
# define parameters recommended for Visium
lambda <- 0.2
k_geom <- 18

# calculate the BANKSY matrix without AGF
hvg_spe <- Banksy::computeBanksy(hvg_spe, assay_name = "logcounts", k_geom = k_geom)

# show the SPE
hvg_spe
```

> Notice we now have only 2000 genes, which is because we subset the full object for the `BANKSY` calculations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice we now have only 2000 genes, which is because we are using the HVG subset for the `BANKSY` calculations.
```

We also see that a new `H0` assay has been added to the SPE, representing the neighborhood-averaged spot expression. 
Each entry represents the average expression of a given gene across the spatial neighbors of a given spot, rather than the spot's own expression.

```{r show H0}
assay(hvg_spe, "H0")[1:5, 1:5]
```

`computeBanksy()` also stores the parameters it used in the SPE's `metadata` slot, which is useful for keeping track of settings across runs:

```{r banksy nonagf metadata}
# show the SPE metadata
metadata(hvg_spe)$BANKSY_params
```

> Now, we can run `Banksy::runBanksyPCA()`, which combines `logcounts` and `H0` into a single matrix weighted by `lambda` and then runs PCA on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we can use `Banksy::runBanksyPCA()`, which combines `logcounts` and `H0` into a single matrix weighted by `lambda` and then runs PCA on it.
```

```{r banksy pca, live = TRUE}
# calculate PCA within BANKSY
hvg_spe <- Banksy::runBanksyPCA(hvg_spe, lambda = lambda)

# show the SPE
hvg_spe
```

The new PCA that `BANKSY` has calculated is named `PCA_M0_lam0.2`: `M0` indicates that AGF was not used, and `lam0.2` records the `lambda` value.
`BANKSY` generates these names automatically, making it easy to track different reduced dimension calculations when comparing multiple runs.

> Here we'll use `scran` and `scater` directly to keep the workflow consistent with what we did above.

Reviewer: I think we are missing a sentence to acknowledge the Banksy functions? I also reversed order here so we can be a but more clear about what scater and scran are doing, without making the sentence too complex.
```suggestion
To keep the workflow consistent with what we did above, we'll use `scater` and `scran` directly for calculating UMAPs, plotting, and clustering.
```
